<pre>
  MIP: 43
  Title: Purpose Field for Deterministic Wallets
  Author: Marek Palatinus <slush@satoshilabs.com>
          Pavol Rusnak <stick@satoshilabs.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2014-04-24
</pre>

==Abstract==

This MIP introduces a "Purpose Field" for use in deterministic wallets
based on algorithm described in MIP-0032 (MIP32 from now on).

==Motivation==

Although Hierarchical Deterministic Wallet structure as described by MIP32
is an important step in user experience and security of the cryptocoin wallets,
the MIP32 specification offers implementors too many degrees of freedom.
Multiple implementations may claim they are MIP32 compatible, but in fact
they can produce wallets with different logical structures making them
non-interoperable. This situation unfortunately renders "MIP32 compatible"
statement rather useless.


==Purpose==

We propose the first level of MIP32 tree structure to be used as "purpose".
This purpose determines the further structure beneath this node.

<pre>
m / purpose' / *
</pre>

Apostrophe indicates that MIP32 hardened derivation is used.

We encourage different schemes to apply for assigning a separate MIP number
and use the same number for purpose field, so addresses won't be generated
from overlapping MIP32 spaces.

Example: Scheme described in MIP44 should use 44' (or 0x8000002C) as purpose.

Note that m / 0' / * is already taken by MIP32 (default account), which
preceded this MIP.

Not all wallets may want to support the full range of features and possibilities
described in these MIPs. Instead of choosing arbitrary subset of defined features
and calling themselves MIPxx compatible, we suggest that software which needs
only a limited structure should describe such structure in another MIP and use
different "purpose" value.


==Node serialization==

Because this scheme can be used to generate nodes for more cryptocurrencies
at once, or even something totally unrelated to cryptocurrencies, there's no
point in using a special version magic described in section "Serialization
format" of MIP32. We suggest to use always 0x0488B21E for public and 0x0488ADE4
for private nodes (leading to prefixes "xpub" and "xprv" respectively).

==Reference==

* [[mip-0032.mediawiki|MIP32 - Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets]]
